NINETEENTHCONGRESS Third Regular Session House Bill No. 11111

# Introduced by Representative Gabriel H. Bordado, Jr.

心

# EXPLANATORY NOTE

The agriculture sector is a critical pillar of the Philippine economy， providing livelihoodi for many Filipino families. As a predominantly agricultural nation， the Philippines relies heavily on farming and related activities. However， the country's geographic location makes it highly susceptible to natural disasters， including typhoons, floods，and droughts. In recent years, the agriculture sector had been severely impacted by successive strong typhoons， leading to substantial losses amounting to billions of pesos and challenging the resilience and productivity of the industry.

To secure ongoing progress and strengthen food security， it is essential to adopt an approach that leverages the latest available technologies within the agriculture sector. Integrating innovations like smart agriculture can help increase productivity， reduce labor demands, and address resource efficiency. By doing so, the sector can better adapt to modern challenges,boost resilience against climate risks, and ensure sustainable food production for future generations.

This bill aims to institutionalize the Smarter Approaches to Reinvigorate Agriculture as an Industry (SARAi) initiative by establishing a National Integrated Crop Monitoring and Forecasting Center, referred to as the SARAi Center, at the University of the Philippines Los Banos in Laguna. The center wil serve as a hub for advanced agricultural monitoring, crop forecasting, and data-driven decision-making to enhance agricultural productivity and resilience in the Philippines.

The passage of this measure is earnestly sought.

House Bil No.11111

# Introduced by Representative Gabriel H. Bordado, Jr.

# ANACTINSTITUTIONALIZINGSMARTERAPPROACHESTOREINVIGORATEAGRICULTUREASANINDUSTRY(SARAI)，ANDAPPROPRIATINGFUNDSTHEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shallbe known as the “Smarter Approaches to Reinvigorate Agriculture as an Industry (SARAl) Act."

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy. - Consistent with the mission of the Climate Change Act of 20o9, it is the policy of the State to uphold food security, sustainable economic development, and farmers'well-being by ensuring the availability of critical information services to proactively adapt to the adverse impact of the worsening global climate crisis.

Towards this end， the State shall institutionalize the access，adoption， and advancement of a nationwide Integrated Crop Monitoring and Forecasting_system through the Smarter Approaches to Reinvigorate Agriculture as an Industry to facilitate localized climate-smart decision-making，enable site-specific optimized agricultural resource management， and support post-disaster agricultural insurance and indemnification programs.

SECTION 3. Definition of Terms.- As used in this Act, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

a. Integrated Crop Monitoring and Forecasting - It is the collection of critical information services produced by advanced computer and digital technologies, such as: remote sensing, geospatial mapping,and machine learning，used to enable climate-smart decision-making in agriculture.   
b. Climate-Smart Decision-Making - It is the integrated， proactive，and datadriven process of leveraging critical information services_in guiding key management decisions and operational conditions that will effectively address the impacts of climate change and maximize intended outcomes.   
C. Optimized Agriculture Resource Management - It is a management approach that employs a diversified system of innovative technologies，practices，and techniques that seeks to achieve the highest levels of agricultural productivity

with the lowest possible amount of inputs in a sustainable and equitable manner.

d. Post-Disaster Agricultural Insurance and Indemnification-It includes insurance policies and financial programs that aim to protect agricultural producers against unexpected financial losses as a result of climate change-related events and disasters.

SECTiON 4. National Integrated Crop Monitoring and Forecasting Center- There is hereby established a National Integrated Crop Monitoring and Forecasting Center, herein after referred to as the SARAi Center. The SARAi Center will be based and headquartered at the University of the Philippine Los Banos in Los Banos, Laguna.

SECTION 5. Functions and Responsibilities of the Center - The Center shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities.

a.Provide regular， accessible，and advanced crop monitoring and forecasting information services to agriculture sector stakeholders across the Philippines.   
b. Coordinate with government agencies, local government units, state colleges and universities,research institutions, farmers' cooperatives,and the private sector to facilitate the prompt delivery of integrated crop monitoring and forecasting information services;   
C. Spearhead collaborative and cutting-edge research and development on integrated crop monitoring and forecasting to promote climate resilient agriculture using advanced computer and digital technologies,with a special focus on the applications of artificial intelligence.

SECTION 6. ICMF Oversight Board. - There is hereby established an ICMF Oversight Board, hereinafter referred to as the Board. This shall be composed of the heads of the folowing institutions and agencies，or their designated permanent representatives:

a. University of the Philippines Los Banos (UPLB) - SARAi， to serve as Chairperson;   
b. Department of Agriculture;   
C. Department of Science and Technology;   
d. Department of Interior and Local Government;   
e. Department of Information and Communications Technology;   
f. Representative from Private Sector;   
g. Representative from LGUs; and   
h. Three (3) Representative from Farmers’ Cooperatives，each from Luzon, Visayas,and Mindanao

SECTlON 7. Functions and Responsibilities of the ICMF Oversight Board. - The Board shall convene at least twice a year to monitor and oversee the operation and administration of the Center. The Board shall have the following functions:

a. Approve the organizational， budget, operational， and strategic plans of the Center;   
b. Confirm the rules and guidelines of the implementation of the institutionalization of the Integrated Crop Monitoring and Forecasting; and

c. Provide recommendations to advance the quality, accessibility， and impact of the critical information services produced by the Center.

SECTION 8. Reports. - The Center shall prepare and submit to the President and both Houses of Congress an annual report on the implementation of the program which shall contain the list of accomplishments and recommendations for improvements.

SECTiON 9. Appropriations. - The amount of Ten Million Pesos (Php 10,000,oo0.0o) is hereby appropriated to carry out the provisions of this Act. Subsequent appropriations for the implementation of this act shal be included in the Annual General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 10. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). - Within sixty days from the effectivity of this Act, the Center shall convene with the ICMF Oversight Board to formulate and adopt the Implementing Rules and Regulations of this Act within the ensuing period of three months.

SECTlON 11. Separability Clause. - If, for any reason, any part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional， the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 12. Repealing Clause. - All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 13. Effectivity Clause. - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,