NINETEENTH (19th) CONGRESS Second Regular Session House Bill No. 9540

Introduced by: Hon. Ma. Victoria Co - Pilar

# EXPLANATORY NOTE

As the country's basic unit, the barangay serves as the primary planning and implementing unit of government programs, basic services, projects and activities.

The conduct of Barangay and Sangguniang Kabataan elections in the Philippines are pivotal in our democratic system, as these governing units are the foundation of local governance and the stepping stone for future leaders. However, these elections have faced numerous challenges, including irregularities, inefficiencies,and a lack of transparency in the past. The manual process of voting and counting has been susceptible to human error and fraud, which undermine the trust and credibility of these elections.

In the latest National and Local Elections concluded last May 9，2022，the Commission on Elections lauded that this election has recorded the fastest processing of results and the highest voter turnout compared to the previous years since the adoption of the Automated Election System in 2010. This manifests the practicality and eficiency of adopting timely technology to expedite the system of elections and streamline our democratic process.

This proposed bill seeks to address these issues by advocating for the implementation of automated systems for both the Barangay and SK elections. The key features of this proposal include the use of Automated Election System (AES)

which will be mandated in all elections.Voters will cast their ballots electronically, and the system will automatically tabulate the results.

In view of the foregoing passage of tis billis earnestly sought.

NINETEENTH (19th) CONGRESS Second Regular Session

House Bill No. 9540

Introduced by: Hon. Ma. Victoria Co - Pilar

AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS TO USE AN AUTOMATED ELECTION SYSTEM IN THE CONDUCT OF BARANGAY AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN ELECTIONS,AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8436, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT 9369, AND OTHER RELATED ELECTIONLAWS, PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

1SECTION 1. Section 2 of Republic Act 8436 is amended as follows:

“SEC.2. Definition of Terms.- As used in this Act, the following terms shall   
mean:   
“xxx”

“6. City/municipal/district/provincial/BARANGAY/SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN certificate of canvass - a document in electronic and printed form containing the total votes in figures obtained by each candidate in a city/municipality/district/province/BARANGAY/SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN as the case may be. The electronic certificate of canvass shall be the official canvass results in the aforementioned jurisdictions;" “xxx”

“9.Counting Center-a public place within the city/municipality/BARANGAY or in such other places as may be designated by the Commission where the official ballots cast in various precincts of the city/municipality/BARANGAY shall be counted. Polling places of voting centers may also be designated as counting centers;”

SECTION 2. Section 6 of Republic Act 8436 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC.5.Authority to Use an Automated Election System.- To carry out the above-stated policy, the Commission on Elections,herein referred to as the Commission,is hereby authorized to use an automated election system or systems in the same election in different provinces,whether paper-based or a direct recording electronic election system as it may deem appropriate and practicalfortheprocessofvoting， countingofvotesand canvassing/consolidation and transmittal of results of electoral exercises: Provided, that for the regular national, local， BARANGAY， AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN election, which shall be held immediately after the effectivity of this Act, the AES shall be used in at least two highly urbanized cities and two provinces each in Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao, to be chosen by the Commission: Provided, further, that the local government units whose officials have been the subject of administrative charges within sixteen (16) months prior to the May 14, 2007 elections shall not be chosen: Provided finally， that no area shall be chosen without the consent of the Sangguniang of the local government unit concerned. The term local government unit as used in this provision shall refer to a highly urbanized city orprovince. In succeeding regular national， local，BARANGAY，AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN elections, the AES shall be implemented nationwide."

ECTION 3. Section 11 (1) of Republic Act 8436 is hereby amended to read as follows: “SEC.11. Functions of the Technical Evaluation Committee -The Committee shall certify,through an established international certification entity to be chosen by the Commission from the recommendations of the Advisory Council, not later than three months before the date of the electoral exercise, categorically stating that the AES,including its hardware and software components, is operating properly, in accordance with the provisions of this Act based,among others,on the following documented results:

“1. The successful conduct of a field-testing process followed by a mock election event in or more cities/municipalities/BARANGAYS;

1SECTION 4. Section 20 of Republic Act 8436 is hereby amended to read as follws:

“SEC.20 Notice of Designation of Counting Centers. - The election officer shall post prominently in his/her office，in the bulletin boards at the city/municipal/BARANGAY/SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN hall and in three other conspicuous places in the city/municipality/BARANGAY, the notice on the designated counting center(s) for at least three weeks priori to election day. The notice shall specify the precincts covered by each counting center and the number of registered voters in each of the said precincts.The election officer shall also furnish a copy of the notice to the headquarters or official address of the political parties or independent candidates within the same period. The election officer shall post in the Commission website concerned the said notice and publish the notices in the local newspapers. Where the policing place or voting center is also the designated counting center, such information shall be contained in the notice."

# “xxx”

CTION 5. Section 25 of Republic Act 8436 is hereby amended to read as follows: “SEC.25. Canvassing by Provincial, City, District, and Municipal Boards of Canvassers.-The city or municipal board of canvassers shall canvass the votes for the president， vice-president， senators,and parties,organizations or coalitions participating under the party-list system by consolidating the electronically transmitted results or the results contained in the data storage devices used in the printing of the election returns.Upon completion of the canvass, it shall print the certificate of canvass of votes for president, vicepresident, senators and members of the House of Representatives and elective provincial officials and thereafter,proclaim the elected city or municipal officials, as the case may be.

# “xxx”

"The district/provincial board of canvassers shall canvass the votes for president, vice-president, senators,members of the House of Representatives and elective provincial officials by consolidating the results electronically transmitted from the city/municipal consolidating centers or the results contained in the data storage devices submitted by the board of canvassers of the municipalities and component cities. Upon completion of the canvass, it shall produce the certificates of canvass votes for president, vice-president and senators and thereafter，proclaim the elected members of the House of Representatives and the provincial official."

“THE BARANGAY BOARD OF CANVASSERS SHALL CANVASS THE VOTES FOR BARANGAY COUNCIL OFFICIALS，SUCH AS THE CAPTAIN/PUNONG BARANGAY，COUNCILORS/KAGAWADS，AND THE SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN COUNCIL，FROM CHAIRPERSON TO COUNCILORS/KAGAWADS BY CONSOLIDATING THE RESULTS ELECTRONICALLY TRANSMITTED RESULTS CONTAINED IN THE DATA STORAGE DEVICES USED IN THE PRINTING OF THE ELECTION RETURNS.UPON COMPLETION OF THE CANVASS，IT SHALL PRINT THE CERTIFICATE OF CANVASS OF VOTES THE BARANGAY CAPTAIN，KAGAWADS，SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN CHAIRPERSON, AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN KAGAWADS,AND THEREAFTER，PROCLAIM THE ELECTED BARANGAY AND SK OFFICIALS,AS THE CASE MAY BE."

"The BARANGAY, SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN, municipal, city, district, and provincial certificates of canvass of votes shall each be supported by a statement of votes.”

“xxx”

SECTION 6. Section 26 of Republic Act 8436 is hereby amended to read as follows: “SEC.26. Number of Copies of Certificates of Canvass of Votes and their distribution. - (a) The certificate of canvass of votes for president, vicepresident,senators,members of the House of Representatives，parties, organization or coalitions participating under the party-list system and elective provincial，MUNICIPAL，BARANGAY，ANDSANGGUNIANG KABATAAN officials shall be produced by the city or municipal board of canvassers and distributed as follows:

“xxx”

SECTION 7: Section 27 of Republic Act No. 7166, as amended by Republic Act No. 8045   
and Republic Act No.8173 is hereby further amended to read as follows: “SEC. 27. Number of Copies of Election Returns and their Distribution. - The board of election inspectors shall prepare in handwriting the election returns in

their respective polling place, in the number of copies herein provided and in the form to be prescribed and provided by the Commission.

"The copies of election returns shall be distributed by the chairman of the board of election inspectors as follows:

“xxx”

(b) In the election of local officials; "(1） The first copy shall be delivered to the BARANGAY,city，or municipal board of canvassers;

SECTION 8. Section 26 of Republic Act No. 7166 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC.26. Official Watchers. - Every registered political party or coalition of political parties,and every candidate shall each be entitled to one watcher in every polling place and canvassing center: Provided That, candidates for the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, Sangguniang Panlunsod, Sangguniang Bayan, SANGGUNIANG BARANGAY，AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN belonging to the same slate or ticket shall collectively be entitled to only one watcher."

“xxx”

SECTION 9. Section 28 of Republic Act No. 7166 is hereby amended as follows: “SEC．28．Canvassing by Provincial City，District,MUNICIPAL，AND BARANGAY Board of Canvassers.- a） The City，MUNICIPAL，OR BARANGAY of board of canvassers shall canvass the election return of President, Vice president, Senator and Members of the Houseof Representativesandforelectiveprovincial， CITY， MUNICIPAL, BARANGAY, AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN officials: Provided, That the returns for national positions shall be canvassed first Upon completion of the canvass, it shall prepare the certificate of canvass for of Representatives and elective provincial officials,announce the results of the election for national positions in the city or municipality,and thereafter, proclaims the elected city, municipal, BARANGAY, AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN officials, as the case may be.

“THE BARANGAY BOARD OF CANVASSERS SHALL CANVASS THE VOTES FOR BARANGAY COUNCIL OFFICIALS，SUCH AS THE

CAPTAIN/PUNONG BARANGAY，COUNCILORS/KAGAWADS，ANDTHE SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN COUNCIL，FROM CHAIRPERSONTO COUNCILORS/KAGAWADS BY CONSOLIDATING THE RESULTSELECTRONICALLY TRANSMITTED RESULTS CONTAINED IN THEDATA STORAGE DEVICES USED IN THE PRINTING OF THEELECTION RETURNS.UPON COMPLETION OF THE CANVASS，ITSHALL PRINT THE CERTIFICATE OF CANVASS OF VOTES THEBARANGAY CAPTAIN, KAGAWADS， SANGGUNIANG KABATAANCHAIRPERSON, AND SANGGUNIANG KABATAAN KAGAWADS, ANDTHEREAFTER，PROCLAIM THE ELECTED BARANGAY AND SKOFFICIALS,AS THE CASE MAY BE."

“b).” “xxx”

SECTION 10. Appropriations -Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be charged against the appropriations of the COMELEC. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continuous implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 11. Implementing Rules and Regulations. - Within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the COMELEC, in cooperation with the Department of Information and Communications Technology,shall promulgate the rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

SECTION 12. Repealing Clause. - All laws, presidential decrees，executive orders, memoranda, rules,and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Acts are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SECTION 13. Separability Clause. - If any part or provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining parts of provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 14. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,