Introduced by HON.ROZZANO RUFINO B.BIAZON

# EXPLANATORY NOTE

This bill seeks to regulate the development,sale and distribution of Facial recognition technology or FRT.The protection of the right to privacy of our citizens is the primordial concern of this proposed measure.

Facial recognition technology has become increasingly widespread in the past several years. It is used everywhere from airports, banks, event venues,shopping centers and even by some law enforcement agencies in other countries.While there are a few potential benefits to using the technology to prevent and solve crimes, there are many concerns about the privacy, safety and regulation regarding the use of this technology.

Likeany other problem with regard to new technology,the software is far from being perfect.The use of this technology causes concerns about how much people are being watched and if hackers or those with criminal intent can access the data produced by FRT,causing more harm than good.Anactivist group based in the United States called Fight for the Future claims: “It's deeply invasive,and from our perspective,the potential harm to society and human liberties far outweigh the potential benefits.

Facial recognition technology is only growing and it can be powerful and helpful tool when used correctly,but can also cause harm with privacy and security issues.Policy makers will have to balance thisand determine when and how facial technology will be utilized and monitor the use, or in some cases abuse, of the technology.

In view of the foregoing, the passage of this bill is earnestly requested.

Introduced by HON. ROZZANO RUFINO B. BIAZON

# AN ACT REGULATING THE USEOFFACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY ANDFOR OTHERPURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives of the Philippine in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Title.-This Act shallbe knownas the “Facial Recognition Technology Regulation Act".

Sec.2.Declaration of Policy.-It is the policy of the State to protect its citizens from present or future technology that may pose a risk to their right to privacy and may be detrimental totheirwell-being.Tothis end,measuresshouldbetakentoensurethatinnovative technology such as,but not limited to facial recognition,shallberegulatedand be used only for the safety and security of all citizens.

Sec.3.Definition ofTerms.-Asused in this Act, the following terms shall mean:

a.Biometrics-is a technological and scientific authentication method based on biology and used in information assurance (IA);   
b.Facial Recognition Technology (FRT) -any software or system typically used to identify or verify the identity ofa person fromadigital image ora set of facial features stored ina database.

Sec.4.Limitation on the Development, Sale,and Distribution of Facial Recognition Technology.-No company or entity shall develop,sell,or otherwise distribute any facial recognition (FRT) software in the Philippines without authorizationand accreditation from the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT).

Sec.5.Limitation on the UseofFRT.-Law enforcementagenciesand duly authorized safetyand security firmsshall utilizeFRT solely forprofiling,identifyingand locating law offenders and fugitives.Inany case,the subject shall always be informed that hisor her biometricsare being taken.

Sec.6.Use ofFRTBy Private Companies.-Private companies suchas,but notlimited to banks,pawnshops and other financial institutions or such other similar businesses may utilizeFRTtosecureand helpfacilitate itsbusinesstransactions withclients:Provided,That said private companies register the FRT hardware and software with the DICT:Provided further,That private companies utilizingFRTto facilitate business transactions with clients shall offer other options that said clients may utilize other than FRT to facilitate transacting business with them.

Sec.7.Implementing Rules and Regulations.-The Department of Information and Communication Technology (DICT) in coordination with the National Privacy Commission shall come up with the implementing rules and regulations for the proper implementation of this Act within ninety (90) days from its effectivity.

Sec.8.Separability Clause.-If any provision or part hereof,is held invalid or unconstitutional,the remainder ofthe law or the provisionnot otherwise affected shall remain valid and subsisting.

Sec.9.Repealing Clause.-Any law,presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letterof instruction,administrative order,rule orregulation contrarytooris inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Sec.10. Effectivity.-This Act shalltake effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,